THE 
PRODUCT MANAGER 
HANDBOOK
Compiled by Carl Shan
Designed by Brittany Cheng
INTRODUCTION
¡°What in the world is Product Management?¡±
It was the above question, and my burning desire to learn the answer, that sparked the cre-
ation of this handbook.
You see, the inspiration for this handbook came when I was hired as an intern Product Man-
ager in a large education technology company. At that point, although I had successfully im-
pressed the interviewers with my background and passion for education to secure the job, I 
still had relatively little idea what it really meant to be a Product Manager.
Worried that I wouldn¡¯t be able to excel in my role, I decided to spend the few months until 
my internship connecting with, interviewing, and learning from some of the best Product 
Managers in the field.
Fortunately, I was able to get in touch with some of the most brilliant, thoughtful and helpful 
individuals working in Product Management. Hailing from companies like Google, Facebook 
and Microsoft, these Product Managers not only agreed to share their insights with me, but 
they also generously gave permission for their thoughts to be included in this handbook to be 
distributed publicly with the entire world.
What you have in front of you are the distilled and polished gems of wisdom that were un-
earthed during the course of all these conversations.
This handbook provides invaluable insight for anyone interested in working as a Product 
Manager or who simply wants to learn about what it takes to build an excellent product. In 
reading the conversations contained here, you will find career advice, product advice and 
even life advice. 
My dream is that the insights contained within this handbook will serve as inspiration for 
people everywhere to create amazing products that improve the world.
Enjoy.
Carl Shan
CONTENTS
HOW TO GET A JOB AS A PM      4
INTERVIEWS            8
JEREMY CARR          8
CLEARSLIDE
JASON SHAH        13
YAMMER
LUKE SEGARS        17
GOOGLE
LILY HE         21
WORK MARKET
SUNIL SAHA        25
PERKVILLE
SEAN GABRIEL        29
MICROSOFT
DAVID SHEIN        34
FACEBOOK
PAUL ROSANIA       37
TWITTER
LAYLA AMJADI        45
FACEBOOK
AVICHAL GARG       52
FACEBOOK
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS      58
ABOUT CARL & BRITTANY     59
4
HOW TO GET A JOB AS A 
PRODUCT MANAGER
People go to medical school to become a doctor and law school to become a lawyer, but what 
do they do to become a product manager? Business school is one option, but there are many 
others. Product management jobs are within reach of new graduates.
How do you get into Product Management straight out of college?
Big tech companies like Google, Microsoft, and Facebook are always hiring new grad prod-
uct managers
1
. Write up your r¨¦sum¨¦ and head to your school¡¯s career fair to chat with the 
recruiters. 
If these companies aren¡¯t recruiting at your school, you¡¯ll need to network. Find friends who 
can connect you with a recruiter, or try to connect with employees from the company using 
Twitter, Quora, LinkedIn, or their blogs. Many employees are happy to refer people who have 
shown a genuine interest in the company and have a strong resume.
Some startups will also hire fresh college graduates into Product Manager roles, but this is 
more unusual. Typically, to land such a role, you¡¯ll have to really stand out as a PM candidate 
and get your foot in through your personal / professional network.
1  Note: The name of this role might differ from company to company. Microsoft hires many new grads for Program Manager 
roles, which is the equivalent of other companies¡¯ product manager roles. Microsoft also has a Product Manager role, but this is 
more of a marketing function and is usually not entry level. Google has an entry-level role called a Associate Product Manager and 
a more senior role called a Product Manager.
Gayle Laakmann McDowell and Jackie Bavaro
5
How do you get a Product Management internship?
Product Manager internships are obtained the same way that full-time PM roles are: through 
career fairs and networking. The big tech companies tend to have PM internships, but the 
smaller companies do not.
What if you can¡¯t get a PM internship?
If you can¡¯t get a PM internship but desperately want to be a PM, never fear! You can still get 
a lot of relevant experience that will help you in your path to be a PM. Consider the following 
paths.
Option 1: Do a software development internship.
Companies would ideally like their PMs to have strong technical skills, so a software devel-
oper internship is a good time to boost your skills here. During your internship, look for ways 
to show leadership. Can you volunteer to write up the spec for a new feature? Analyze data 
that you¡¯ve gotten from customers? Maybe run a few meetings? Doing these things will help 
you demonstrate PM talent.
But should you go for a startup or a big company role? Both can be good paths.
A big company will stick an excellent name on your resume, and give you an ¡°in¡± with a re-
cruiter at that company. That could be very useful when you look for a PM role the following 
year.
On the other hand, startups often have less defined roles ¨C and lots of work to be done. They 
are moving fast and the upcoming features may not be fully fleshed out. Guess who gets to 
define them? The programmers. In this situation, you aren¡¯t a programmer; you¡¯re a ¡°pro-
grammer++.¡± You have the opportunity to take on PM-like responsibilities even as a software 
developer intern.
Option 2: Build a side project
Just because you¡¯re a student doesn¡¯t mean you can¡¯t be an entrepreneur ¡ª at least on your 
own side project.
If you have coding skills, you can build your own web or mobile application. This means that 
you¡¯re developing your technical skills and your leadership and analytical skills. You are act-
ing as a developer and a PM.
Need money for your summer work? No problem. You can do software development consult-
ing by taking on projects from Elance and oDesk. 
If you don¡¯t have coding skills, you could use your summer to learn to code, you could part-
ner with an engineer, you could (if you have the money) outsource development on oDesk 
HOW TO GET A JOB AS A PM
6
or Elance, or you could launch something that doesn¡¯t require programming. There is a lot of 
off-the-shelf software to help companies in specific niches.
Building a side project is an excellent path for freshmen and sophomores who might other-
wise have trouble obtaining an internship. Give your project a snazzy name and you might 
even be able to list this under your resume¡¯s employment section, with you as Founder / CEO. 
What do recruiters look for in PM candidates?
The background of the ¡°perfect¡± PM varies across companies and even teams, but usually has 
the following attributes:
? Leadership
? Analytical & Data Skills
? Technical Skills
? Initiative
? Product Design Skills & Customer Focus
? Strong Work Ethic
Note that this is the perfect PM. Even many experienced industry PMs will be missing some 
of these attributes.
This can be a useful framework to approach your experience and resume from. How can you 
demonstrate that you have these skills? If you don¡¯t yet have these skills (or haven¡¯t yet done 
something to demonstrate that you do), how can you develop these skills?
For example, a student from a strong school with a major in Computer Science and a strong 
GPA might get a phone screen just by handing in her resume. Her major shows technical skills 
and her GPA is a signal of work ethic. However, her resume would be even stronger if she had 
launched a programming contest on campus. That shows initiative.
Although some of these attributes sound ¡°fluffy,¡± they can all be demonstrated through con-
crete actions.
? Leadership? Become a president of a club or lead an organization.
? Analytical / data skills? Quantitative coursework (computer science, math, physics, eco-
nomics, etc) can demonstrate you know your stuff here.
? Technical skills? A Computer Science major or minor will do the trick. Or you can learn to 
code and list some projects you¡¯ve done on your resume. Or, even if you don¡¯t know how 
to code, you can at least maintain your own website.
? Initiative? Do some side projects for fun. Launch a club. Organize a school-wide volunteer 
effort.
? Product Design skills / customer focus? Focus on creating a beautiful application ¡ª and 
provide screenshots on your resume. If the aesthetics of application design aren¡¯t your 
HOW TO GET A JOB AS A PM
7
thing, get a friend to help you out with it, while you focus on getting a feature set that re-
ally addresses your user¡¯s needs. 
? Work ethic? A good GPA, a bunch of projects, or basically anything difficult that you¡¯ve 
been successful in shows work ethic. One student listed on his resume that he ¡°completed 
62 miles of a 100 mile ultra-marathon, after getting injuring ankle on mile 30.¡± This might 
not have been the most medically sound decision, but it did show perseverance. (Yes, his 
interviewers asked about this!) He¡¯s now working his butt off as a PM for Apple.
Demonstrating these doesn¡¯t mean demonstrating them all separately. In fact, a single side 
project could show all five of these aspects.
Once you¡¯ve made good progress with some of these aspects, add what you did to your re-
sume and apply for a PM job. As you meet with people, talk about what you did and the 
choices you made. You¡¯ve just created PM experience for yourself!
HOW TO GET A JOB AS A PM
This advice to aspiring Product Managers was kindly contributed by Gayle McDowell, author of 
¡°Cracking the Coding Interview¡± (and ex-Google, Microsoft, and Apple engineer), and Jackie Bava-
ro, a Product Manager at Asana (and ex-Google and Microsoft PM). You can learn more about their 
thoughts on how to land and excel in a Product or Program Manager job and interview through their 
upcoming book ¡°Cracking the PM Interview.¡± The book is estimated to be released in Fall 2013. Sign 
up to be notified when the book is released at www.crackingthepminterview.com, or search for it on 
Amazon.
8
JEREMY CARR
Director of Product at ClearSlide
JEREMY¡¯S BACKGROUND
Jeremy is the Director of Product at ClearSlide, where he focuses on data and analytic prod-
ucts. ClearSlide is a sales engagement platform that helps to close more deals faster. Previous-
ly, he held product leadership roles at Palantir, Stylemob (acquired by Glam), and Videoegg 
(now Say Media). 
He earned an MS in management science and engineering from Stanford and BA in computer 
science and economics from Carleton College.  
SUMMARY OF JEREMY¡¯S INTERVIEW
In his following interview, Jeremy shares:
? The thought experiment Product Managers can use to figure out what skills to build
? The 5 top career metrics he uses to track his own success
? Specific product design skills to learn as a Product Manager
? His thoughts on the potential conflict between ambition and contentment
? And more...
Read on to learn more from Jeremy!
9
JEREMY¡¯S ANSWERS
In your opinion, what are the goals and purpose of Product Managers? And as some-
one who is not coming from the engineering side of things, what are some of the 
most valuable skills I could develop in a 3-month internship as a Product Manage-
ment intern?
In terms of understanding the goals and purposes of a PM, I would suggest reading Ben 
Horowitz¡¯s piece on ¡®Good Product Managers, Bad Product Managers.¡¯
As for skills, I would recommend to start developing your-
self on the design side of product (ability to prototype), 
and/or the technical side of product (substantively know 
what you¡¯re talking about; be able to estimate how long 
things will take and think through details).
A useful heuristic to use in thinking about this is to imagine there just being two people on 
the product team: you and a developer. How would you contribute? This thought experiment 
distills more clearly the skills you might be interested in developing to build a solid founda-
tion, whether you stay working in startups or not. Another approach is to think of a team that 
is comprised of yourself, five developers, one designer, and one QA person. Now how will 
you contribute?  Communication, organization, GTD, and good project management become 
more relevant.
Specific design skills that are worthwhile to pick up would be to look into wireframing (e.g., 
using tools like Visio, Balsamiq), fundamental UX principles and design (higher-resolution 
mockups; concepts of user flow), graphic design (Photoshop or Illustrator), and potentially 
learning JavaScript (AJAX and jQuery are pretty important),  etc.
Additionally if you¡¯re looking for principles on a life well lived, you should check out Ray 
Dalio¡¯s ¡°Principles¡±. He¡¯s someone who¡¯s done a lot of deep thinking on this. Another book I 
would recommend is Peter Bevelin¡¯s ¡°Seeking Wisdom¡±.
What could an intern or newly hired Product Manager do to add value as quickly as 
possible?
Domain: within first few weeks, try to find a project with measurable impact you want to de-
liver on over the course of your internship. Then make sure that you execute on it.
Skills: each product management opportunity is different, but functionally, they¡¯re typically 
design (information architecture, UX, or graphic design), development/spec¡¯ing (detail-orien-
tation, learning to work with engineering, etc), or project management (ticketing, prioritiza-
tion, etc). Make sure that you leave the internship having built some of these skills.
Personally, I also think you should use this to assess what you enjoy doing on a day to day 
How will you contribute?
10
basis. It¡¯s hard to maintain focus and discipline if you¡¯re working on a part of the stack that 
you don¡¯t find engaging.
What mental models or criteria do you use to judge the success of a product?
On the business side, there are many books on KPI¡¯s. Familiarize yourself with those con-
cepts. Be clear about how the feature/product is contributing to the overall success of the com-
pany. Ask yourself ¡°if this were wildly successful, what would that look like?¡±  Important to 
consider whether the feature/product you¡¯re working on is an experiment or an incremental 
improvement; will drastically change how you evaluate its success.
Assessing the technical quality of a product is tricky 
from a product standpoint.  You certainly need to en-
sure the user flows make sense, and that no ¡°bugs¡± 
that are actually unintended consequences make it 
into your designs.  Beyond that, a lot of the technical 
merit of your product will rely on the technical team 
you work with, and an engineering manager.  Con-
cepts like regression testing, test driven design, uptime, dev - staging - launch process...are all 
useful technical concepts to stay on top of.
What are the metrics you use in measuring your own success? Which ones are the 
highest priority, and why?
1. Product: Am I effectively balancing the interests of shareholders, customers, and employ-
ees? Can I build a roadmap that captures the vision of the executive team/customers?  Can 
I get consensus and/or buy-in for that? Can I deliver on time with good quality? 
2. Leadership: Can I motivate my team? Can I point folks in the right direction? Can I remove 
roadblocks from them quickly and effectively? 
Three additional things I will say are good rules of thumb to follow in tracking your own 
career are:
1. Focus on the quality of people you¡¯re working with. That¡¯s why I joined Palantir and am 
still invested in the alumni network, as well as ClearSlide. The people I work with are 
amazing, and I¡¯m sure will be doing some incredible things in the future.  With good com-
pany, no road is long.
2. Look at the individual contributions you can make. What skills are you building? For ex-
ample, as a PM who may not be coming from an entirely technical background, it would 
be valuable to deeply understand marketing and distribution channels. 
3. Have a personal narrative that you feel comfortable sharing with others, as well as inter-
nalizing. You should be able to tie together a cohesive story. The things you pursue in the 
future should in some way be compounding upon the things you¡¯ve done in the past. Look 
at the amount of opportunities you receive to learn new things.
Ask yourself ¡°if this were 
wildly successful, what would 
that look like?¡±
JEREMY CARR
11
For me personally, I try to stick to thinking about the short and medium term. I look at things 
in the 3 to 5-year range. I find it hard to plan beyond that, and consider life an endless se-
quence of emergent effects.  For some people, they have a life goal such as becoming VP of 
Product at Amazon. And that may work for them. But I think there¡¯s a lot of serendipity in life, 
and I¡¯m very much open to possibilities that I can¡¯t imagine right now.
I think if you¡¯re engaged day to day in your role, 
things are more likely than not to turn out for the 
better. I am not a fan of living a deferred life plan, 
which is the notion of putting off today what you 
really want to do in favor of some things you think 
you ¡°need¡± to do. So whatever it is that your career 
entails, try to make it something you¡¯re genuinely enjoying.
I have friends who tell me they¡¯re uncomfortable deeply valuing happiness and con-
tentment in their own lives as they are concerned it will stifle ambition. Do you have 
any thoughts here, especially in the context of you¡¯ve just mentioned about enjoying 
every day?
Is happiness and contentment really at odds with ambition?  I think people frequently confuse 
contentment and happiness for its more malicious relative ¡ª complacency. Complacency 
leads to the stifling stagnation that results in dissatisfaction down the road. Fundamentally, 
ambition is a strong desire to achieve something; from a scientific mindset it¡¯s as simple as 
wanting to solve problems and answer questions.
There are also some companies that I think we can agree are very ambitious companies, all 
while maintaining a sense of play. I think some of the most successful companies in the Valley 
are great examples of successfully implementing this type of culture. Facebook and Palantir 
are two examples. Learning from these examples can help us to better understand why happi-
ness doesn¡¯t necessarily conflict with ambition. I embrace goal-oriented environments, which 
can be hard charging but I ultimately find fulfilling.
When I speak with older professionals or more successful professionals, one thing I notice is 
that they¡¯ve largely figured out their work/life balance. There are two types of hard work that 
entrepreneurs (or really anyone) tend to be engaged in:
1. Sustainable hard work
2. Unsustainable hard work
You may be able to maintain the unsustainable kind for months, or even years. But I¡¯d urge 
such a person to at least note its impact on one¡¯s life ¡ª it probably looks like living a shitty life 
right now. So I¡¯d encourage folks to find sustainable work. Keep in mind that, with all of these 
things (startups, success, life), it¡¯s a marathon, not a sprint.
I guess I have a different perspective on this than many Silicon Valley technologists because 
I travel a lot and have seen a lot of alternative ways of living that are outside of the Silicon 
Valley bubble.
Focus on the quality of the 
people you¡¯re working with.
JEREMY CARR
12
I¡¯ve often heard the advice that I should do a ¡°technical¡± job first for a few years be-
fore jumping into PM, because it¡¯s hard to switch back to a ¡°technical¡± job (such as 
programming, designing) after doing a PM role. What do you think of this advice? Is 
it a good idea to jump right into the PM role after graduation, or is it better to do a 
regular role first and move in to the PM role?
There are different types of PMs. At a small company, Product Managers need to be able to 
contribute to real product creation. At larger companies, not necessarily. But generally, the 
more technical you are, the better (it gives you a leg up against the army of MBA¡¯s that also 
want to be PMs). How will you differentiate yourself if you do a PM role immediately after 
graduation?
JEREMY CARR
13
JASON SHAH
Product Manager at Yammer
JASON¡¯S BACKGROUND
Jason is a Product Manager at Yammer, where he focuses on building out new features for the 
leading enterprise social network. He is also the founder of HeatData, a mobile web heatmap-
ping and analytics tool. 
Prior to Yammer, Jason founded INeedAPencil.com, which provides free online education 
tools to students from low-income families. After growing INeedAPencil.com to more than 
50,000 users with an average score increase of 202 points, Jason sold INeedAPencil.com to 
CK12 in 2011.
Jason holds an AB with honors from Harvard College with degrees in sociology and computer 
science. He blogs regularly at blog.jasonshah.org and tweets shorter thoughts at @jasonyoges-
hshah. 
SUMMARY OF JASON¡¯S INTERVIEW
In his following interview, Jason elaborates on:
? A story that illustrates the goals of Product Managers
? The 3 important skills for interns to learn 
? How a Product Manager could compensate for a non-technical background
? And more...
Read on to learn more from Jason!
14
JASON¡¯S ANSWERS
In your opinion, what are the goals and purpose of Product Managers? What are 
some of the most valuable skills that a young intern aspiring to be a Product Man-
ager could develop?
The goal of Product Managers is to help a team build the best product possible - through 
prioritizing what to work on, helping design beautiful user experiences, guiding engineering 
to avoid roadblocks while leaving them autonomous, and working with all other parts of the 
organization to provide transparency and input into the product development process.
One way to look at it is to see that part of the role is to 
make engineering go faster.
Overall, you want to empower the engineering team, 
the designers, the analytics team, etc. Your job isn¡¯t as 
concrete as other disciplines, so you need to be good at 
supporting those other roles.
A story that illustrates the points made above relates to something that I worked on recently 
at Yammer. This feature allowed users to mention Pending Users. Pending Users are people 
who began to sign up but haven¡¯t activated their accounts yet. Now, just thinking about this, 
it¡¯s not a particularly inspiring feature. The name of the feature is quite boring, admittedly. 
But it¡¯s a crucial one, and you need to, as Product Manager, be able to have the vision to see 
its power and explain why it¡¯s such a valuable part of the product.
For example, I framed it in terms of the larger vision of connecting employees and accelerating 
collaboration. It¡¯s important to be able to communicate with (via mentioning) people in your 
company, whether or not they are registered for Yammer, and we can never replace email un-
til we nail that. With that vision, people could easily see the value in what we were building.
As an intern, it¡¯s going to be especially difficult to be a successful Product Manager, because 
you¡¯re in a ramp-up period of three to six months before you really get the hang of things. So 
for valuable skills, I would say:
1. Prioritization: This is hard as a PM. With limited resources and a backlog of projects, you 
need to make sure you identify the highest-impact projects to work on. Your choice of 
prioritization impacts everything: what gets built, how the rest of the product is affected, 
the morale of the teams working on the feature. You should be using data, user research, 
product vision, and an understanding of engineering costs to help prioritize features.
2. Vision: Anyone can come in and suggest we move a pixel here and a pixel there. Where 
do you see the product going in three to five years? What about the product today is being 
missed by our users? How do we turn a moderately successful app into a sensation?
3. Analytics: PMs today need to be data-informed. You should be looking at how people use 
your product and generating ideas there (in addition to more green-field brainstorming). 
You want to empower the 
engineering team.
15
You should be measuring the performance of features rigorously and only releasing what 
does well and killing what doesn¡¯t.
I¡¯ve heard that it¡¯s heavily preferred for Product Managers to have technical back-
grounds (e.g., they¡¯ve previously been engineers). What advice would you give to 
someone who may not have as much of a technical background but is still aspiring 
to work as a Product Manager?
The reason it¡¯s valuable for PMs to be technical is be-
cause it allows them to make good tradeoffs. Tech-
nical PMs understand engineering costs. As a result, 
these PMs can make better decisions about what will 
return the greatest benefits for the least costs and how 
to build true MVPs (minimum viable products).
So while you need not be completely technical, you have to be able to build credibility and 
then complement it with actual skills. So the fact that you have some rudimentary under-
standing of computer science will help you avoid any large faux pas.
Ideally, you want to position yourself to be in a company working with engineers who also 
have some product sense so that you don¡¯t need to dictate every last detail.
If you are not technical, try to pick up some understanding of basic concepts: performance, 
frontend and backend, APIs, etc. There is no way around this.
Sit with your engineering team to understand how they build and what their key constraints 
are. Try to unblock them. When you have a feature idea, get engineering input. Over time you 
will learn what is expensive and what is cheap (in engineering terms). When something is 
expensive, you want to aim to build a minimum viable product to validate your idea early or 
have an extremely good justification of the engineering investment.
The point is that you should be making intelligent decisions that others will respect, regard-
less of your level of technical background.
As an intern, I¡¯m concerned about the level of impact I can have in just three months 
at a company. I want to learn a lot, and think I will, but I also want to get a chance to 
actually make an impact. How did you spend your first three months in your first PM 
role, and what would you do differently if you could redo it?
My first three months were spent largely in shadowing other Product Managers, studying 
what¡¯s good and bad about our product and competitors¡¯, and understanding how our prod-
uct development process works.
If you want to maximize your learning and growth as someone who¡¯s aspiring to be a Product 
Manager, I believe you should shadow other folks on the product team ¡ª PMs, designers, 
even engineers. Understand how people work. It will help you figure out how to be effective.
JASON SHAH
Your choice of prioritization 
impacts everything.
16
Another thing I¡¯d say is to research what the product has been in the past: try to understand 
how the team got to where it is today. What was the MVP version of this product? It will show 
you what has been prioritized in the past and how the team is thinking today. Check out past 
A/B tests that they ran to better understand what¡¯s been changed and how certain hypotheses 
worked or failed.
 
What are some mental models you use to view the quality of a product? In other 
words, what are the criteria you use for judging how successful a product is?
At a high level, I ask myself: ¡°What is the user¡¯s 
goal?¡± and ¡°How hard does this product make it to 
accomplish that goal?¡± It shouldn¡¯t be that hard to 
get done what you need to get done as a user. If it¡¯s 
Airbnb, it should be easy to book a good place to 
stay. If you¡¯re Uber, it should be easy to get a black 
car fast. If you¡¯re Google Search, it should be easy to 
find the right information.
From a metrics standpoint, you can also measure a product by the following:
1. Retention: But also understanding the nuances within retention (e.g. one day vs. seven 
days vs. six months).
2. Engagement: Level of interaction and the durations that people are on Yammer.
3. Virality: How many new users are our current users inviting and converting.
Deeply engage with and listen 
to the senior product people 
on the team.
JASON SHAH
17
LUKE SEGARS
Product Manager at Google
LUKE¡¯S BACKGROUND
Luke got his bachelors and masters degrees in computer science before stumbling upon a 
Product Management internship at Google. He spent a summer working on search ads and 
decided that he really enjoyed the work and wanted to continue. He¡¯s now at Google full time 
and has worked on search and YouTube products. 
SUMMARY OF LUKE¡¯S INTERVIEW
In his following interview, Luke raises many thoughtful points, including:
? The top 3 most important objectives are as a Product Manager
? Whether a technical background is necessary for success at Product Management
? The most valuable skills to learn as an aspiring Product Manager
? And more!
Read on to learn from Luke!
18
LUKE¡¯S ANSWERS
In your opinion, what are the goals and purpose of Product Managers? What are 
some of the most valuable skills that a young aspiring Product Manager could de-
velop?
The job of a Product Manager is to identify real 
world problems and to come up with ways to solve 
them. It¡¯s an inherently social job because (1) the 
best solutions rarely come from one person and (2) 
successful products aren¡¯t developed in a vacuum. 
It also requires a degree of scrappiness ¡ª a lot of 
things go into making a successful product and 
there isn¡¯t always an obvious person to do everything. The PM can often pick that stuff up.
The most valuable skills that you can learn in an internship are going to vary a lot. For me:
1. What goes into developing a product outside of coming up with an idea and building it? 
Hint: there are lots of answers.
2. How to pitch an idea, and how to tell a good idea from a bad one. What makes an idea 
stick? What makes a project succeed or fail aside from the capabilities of the individuals 
that are involved?
3. Learn how to structure your thinking. Many creative people are able to explode forth with 
creative ideas. Coming up with a meaningful and communicable structure for those ideas 
is at least as important as coming up with them in the first place.
I¡¯ve heard that it¡¯s heavily preferred for Product Managers to have technical back-
grounds (e.g., they¡¯ve previously been engineers). What advice would you give to 
someone who may not have as much of a technical background but is still aspiring 
to work as a Product Manager?
Talk with engineers. Find people who are willing to spend time explaining things and soak it 
all in. Having technical experience is important but having an interest in and appreciation for 
development is really important as well. I wouldn¡¯t try to fake it, but just make it clear that 
you¡¯re interested and I bet you¡¯ll be able to find people who can teach you.
What advice would you give to a young Product Manager just starting in his or her 
role? How could they allocate their time and energy so as to make a meaningful im-
pact in the first few months of the job? How did you spend your first few months in 
your first PM role, and what would you do differently if you could redo it?
I created a new ad format for Google search, specifically targeted at music labels. There was a 
Identify real world problems 
and come up with ways to 
solve them.
19
ton to learn and, at least in my case, a ton to do. One of the things that I did well was pushing 
beyond my comfort zone to do things that needed to be done and make fast progress on my 
project.
One trap I¡¯ve fallen into since I¡¯ve come back is accepting too much work. Here is how I would 
rank your objectives when you start if you¡¯re actually interested in product management as a 
career:
1. Learn.
2. Do high quality work.
3. Do lots of things.
Unfortunately it¡¯s really, really hard to do all three well. Product Management is an extremely 
flexible field with a lot of different required skills, so investing explicit effort into improving 
some of those skills is likely to make the rest of your life much, much better.
What are some mental models you use to view the quality of a product? In other 
words, what are the criteria you use for judging how successful a product is?
That depends a lot on the product. My favorite cri-
teria: how useful is this product vs the next best 
thing? A product that helps rural farmers in under-
developed regions find places to sell their crops can 
have a tremendous impact compared to a watch 
that let¡¯s you check text messages two seconds fast-
er than you would on your phone, though the latter is shinier and likely to make more money.
On the other hand, money isn¡¯t something to be discounted. Currency, I suppose, is one of the 
signals we have to to measure the quality of a product in the public eye, though I think that¡¯s 
a simplified view of the scene in many (potentially dangerous) ways.
Who are Product Managers in your field that you admire? What traits do you admire 
about them?
There are a number of people that I¡¯ve met at Google that I admire. Some of the ones that 
stand out work as PM¡¯s and lead engineers. One of the most admirable qualities that I¡¯ve en-
countered is when these people have a very strong sense of what direction a product should 
take and are able to articulate that reasoning clearly. This is an important skill and in my opin-
ion a pretty tough one as well.
What are the metrics you use in measuring your own success? Which ones are the 
highest priority, and why?
1. Quality of relationships with peers.
LUKE SEGARS
How useful is the product vs 
the next best thing?
20
2. Regularity of high-quality product releases.
3. General organization on a day to day basis.
I¡¯d say I evaluate myself primarily along those criteria, and roughly in that order. This one 
probably varies more than any of your other questions depending on the company you work 
for and particular product within that company.
I¡¯ve often heard the advice that I should do a ¡°technical¡± job first for a few years 
before jumping into PM, because it¡¯s hard to switch back to a ¡°technical¡± job (such 
as programming, designing) after doing a PM role. Do you think it¡¯s a better idea to 
jump right into the PM role after graduation, or should I do a regular role first and 
move in to the PM role?
I don¡¯t have any experience to base it on but I 
got the same advice. I¡¯ve found my technical 
knowledge to be adequate for getting by with 
a very technical team. It undoubtedly would 
have helped to do some actual engineering for 
a while, but it¡¯s not clear that it¡¯d be more useful 
than a year or two of product experience. I think 
the underlying critical bit is to BE CURIOUS and CONTINUE TO LEARN. If you do that then 
I don¡¯t think skipping the engineering step is a huge mistake.
LUKE SEGARS
Investing explicit effort is likely to 
make the rest of your life much, 
much easier.
21
LILY HE
Product Manager at Work Market
LILY¡¯S BACKGROUND
Lily graduated from MIT with bachelor degrees in math and finance. After graduation, she 
worked in trading and consulting before transitioning into product management at Work 
Market, where she works currently. 
SUMMARY OF LILY¡¯S INTERVIEW 
 
In her following interview, Lily shares her experience on:
? Her atypical background and what led her to Product Management
? What¡¯s unique about being a PM at a startup
? The techniques she used to switch careers into Product Management
? And more!
Read on to learn more from Lily!
22
LILY¡¯S ANSWERS
Can you talk a little bit about your background and what led you to product manage-
ment?
My path to product management is atypical. With a background in finance and math, I had 
worked in trading and consulting before joining the product management team at Work Mar-
ket. While being on the trading floor is often exciting and nerve-racking, I have always been 
interested to be part of a growing business that is constantly innovating and building prod-
ucts that customers will love. I first transitioned from trading into consulting ¡ª you may call 
it a ¡°safe¡± switch ¡ª in order to build my business analytical skills and intuition. However, I 
quickly realized that I wanted to be more proactive, rather than just advising clients on solu-
tions and ideas, and become more actively involved with the product, tactics, and strategy of 
single company; thus, finding my way to Work Market. 
What is Work Market?
Work Market is a cloud-based contractor man-
agement platform that is connected to an online 
marketplace of professionals seeking work assign-
ments. Built to allow scalability, increase produc-
tivity, and enhance the quality of both contractors 
and the work that they fulfill, Work Market enables 
enterprise organizations to do more than take control of skyrocketing operating costs ¡ª it 
empowers them to actually reduce costs and drive efficiency into their business.
If you were standing in a first-grade classroom and had to explain to the students 
what a Product Manager is, what would you tell them?
A Product Manager is someone who takes an idea and brings it to reality. They use all the 
tools they have at their disposal to turn their idea into a product that their customers would 
love and need. 
What are some roles and responsibilities a Product Manager has at a company?
First and foremost, a Product Manager needs to be passionate about the product that they are 
building. Their typical tasks include: writing specifications, prioritizing features, conducting 
user research, analyzing data, coordinating communications, amassing executives buyin. A 
Product Manager needs to be able to break a complex project into manageable tasks and pri-
oritize their executions by working closely with the engineering, marketing, and sales team. 
I wanted to be more proactive 
and more actively involved.
23
Before going into Product Management, did you have an engineering background?
Although I did not have software engineering background, I do have a strong analytical 
background, especially studying in math and working both finance and consulting. Having a 
strong quantitative skills is becoming increasingly important as we rely more on data analysis 
to make our product decisions. 
What do you believe is unique to being a Product Manager at a startup instead of a 
large company?
When you are on the product team of a small 
startup, everyone is a generalist because the 
product is too young for specialization. For 
me, this generalization has been the best part 
about working at Work Market. Not only do 
I write specifications, I also focus on user de-
sign, data analysis and some front-end coding 
as well. Eventually, as the company and the product team grow, it will become necessary to 
have a team hierarchy and for each PM to own a specific vertical of the product.  
What advice would you give someone who is coming from a non-engineering back-
ground and is interested in product management?
Switching careers in general can be a challenging task. First, network as much as possible 
in the industry or field, product management here, that you are interested in by talking to 
friends, friends of friends, alumni. Usually, you¡¯ll find your job opportunities through one of 
those connections. But if not, you should browse job boards and VC websites because most 
VCs list job openings at their portfolio companies. Personally, I¡¯ve found the VC listings very 
helpful. Most importantly, you should know your story well. Why are you interested in Prod-
uct Management? What skills can you leverage from your existing experience? How would 
you contribute to the team right off from the start? Knowing your story will be key to convinc-
ing your interviewers that they should hire you over someone who has existing experience in 
PM. 
Do you think there is anything particularly unique about being a woman in Product 
Management? 
While engineering is in fact a male-dominated field, I have never encountered any gender-re-
lated issues ¡ª a caveat, my experience is limited to Work Market and thus, I don¡¯t think I have 
enough experience to speak generally about this topic. 
When you are on the product team 
of a small startup, everyone is a 
generalist.
LILY HE
24
Do you have any advice you would give to young individuals who are aspiring to 
work as Product Managers?
If you are still in college, I would recommend do-
ing an internship in product management. Product 
management roles and responsibilities can be very 
different depending on the size of the organization. 
Thus, if possible, work in both small and big organi-
zations to figure out what type of product manage-
ment that you would like to do. 
Also, take classes that will help build the skills that you¡¯ll need in product management such 
as design, user interface, and statistical analysis. 
Lastly, don¡¯t be afraid to reach out to firms that you are interested. Use your alumni connec-
tion if it exists. 
What are some specific things you¡¯ve done to develop the skills you believe a suc-
cessful Product Manager needs to have?
For me, I focused on learning everything about user interface and user design first since I did 
not have a product background. I¡¯ve also become pretty proficient with HTML, CSS and a 
little bit of jQuery. As a small product team, we try to help out our engineering team as much 
as possible. So we frequently dig into the code and make small design tweaks and interface 
changes. 
Additionally, data analysis skills (using either SQL, Excel, Python or R) are a must so that you 
can analyze your data to help you make better product decisions or run occasional ad-hoc 
analysis. Conducting A/B testing and user research is also key to making good decisions. 
Lastly, the ability to take feedback critically and effectively coordinating among various inter-
nal teams are among some of the other skills that I¡¯ve developed on the job.  
If possible, work in both small 
and big organizations.
LILY HE
25
SUNIL SAHA
CEO of Perkville
SUNIL¡¯S BACKGROUND
Sunil graduated with a bachelor¡¯s in human biology from Stanford. He then went on to join a 
medical device company before moving into a market research firm (which also specialized in 
medical devices). Afterwards, he joined Neoforma, an internet company, where he fell in love 
with the internet space and began his first foray into Product Management. From Neoforma, 
he moved on to being a senior Product Manager at both Yahoo! and LinkedIn.
Now he is the CEO of Perkville, a startup he co-founded in 2010 that is trying to eliminate 
loyalty cards. 
SUMMARY OF SUNIL¡¯S INTERVIEW 
 
In his following interview, Sunil touches upon:
? What Product Managers should focus on early in their roles
? The top four metrics he uses to measure success
? Valuable things to do as a young Product Management intern
? And more!
Read on to learn more from Sunil!
26
SUNIL¡¯S ANSWERS
In your opinion, what are the goals and purpose of Product Managers? What are 
some of the most valuable skills that a young aspiring Product Manager could de-
velop?
The main goal of a Product Manager is to improve the business. Whatever the bottom line 
may be, your goal is to move it in a positive direction.
If you¡¯re joining the team in a short term role such as an internship, then it¡¯ll be difficult to 
make a big impact. If I were doing an internship in product management, I would focus on 
one project and release it from start to finish. Try to get a feature out that has a meaningful 
impact on the business. This experience will teach you how to lead a team. 
Typically, as a Product Manager, no one officially reports to you, but you still need to muster 
the charisma and resources to lead.
Doing something like owning a product is 
valuable during a stint as a Product Manager 
because it¡¯s very results-oriented and action-
able. It¡¯ll teach you leadership and how to 
scope down to a feature to the bare minimum 
and hopefully release it within a few weeks. 
A lot of PMs are not good at scoping things down to a small chunk.
And when you go through the internship, whatever product you¡¯re working on, make sure 
it¡¯s measurable. A/B test new features for increased retention, engagement, and whatever oth-
er metrics you¡¯re testing against.
I¡¯ve heard that it¡¯s heavily preferred for Product Managers to have technical back-
grounds (e.g., they¡¯ve previously been engineers). What advice would you give to 
someone who may not have as much of a technical background but is still aspiring 
to work as a Product Manager?
I actually don¡¯t think you need a super technical background to be a good PM. However, you 
do need to understand data. You do also need to be able to do some basic querying, such as 
via SQL. That way you can speed up the analytical process because you can run the queries 
yourself without having to go through someone else to get information. 
But as long as you have a good mind for numbers and statistics, you should be in good shape. 
Remember that the engineers are there to do the coding. You, as the PM, are there to drive the 
business forward.
Whatever product you¡¯re working 
on, make sure it¡¯s measurable.
27
What would be some valuable things for Product Managers to focus on early in their 
role?
One thing I would be is extremely skeptical about the feature ideas that people have. Eighty 
percent of ideas that people come up with probably won¡¯t yield good results. As a Product 
Manager, start with this assumption ¡ª be extremely skeptical about the features you work 
on. 
Of the 80% of ideas that flop, I would say 80% of them flop because they are just plain bad 
ideas. 20% of them flop because of execution. So focus on ideas, yet still be skeptical of them.
Analyze the data, understand the customers (e.g., look at customer support tickets), make an 
effort to interview customers to look at the problems people are having.
As a new Product Manager, it would be valuable 
to first look at the product¡¯s historical metrics to 
see how they¡¯ve been growing over time.  Look at 
past projects, what¡¯s been successful, what hasn¡¯t. 
Doing these things will yield valuable frameworks 
upon which you can build your own experience.
What are some mental models you use to view the quality of a product? In other 
words, what are the criteria you use for judging how successful a product is?
The top 3 criteria that are used, almost de facto, at any company are:
1. Revenue ¡ª pretty self-evident
2. Usage levels and frequency (MAU, DAU)
3. Growth of product (number of users)
For an education product that you may do an internship on, there¡¯s probably more specific 
metrics such as whether it¡¯s improving test scores.
What is the most unique skill you¡¯ve seen a PM have that made them exceptional?
I would say the ability to develop the simplest solution to a problem possible as described 
here: The One Cost Engineers and Product Managers Don¡¯t Consider. 
Complexity adds development, maintenance, implementation, training, etc cost so keeping it 
simple is very important. 
One example of a Product Manager who did an exceptional job of this is Marissa Mayer, who 
kept the Google home page simple and clean despite what I¡¯m sure was immense pressure to 
leverage its traffic for other Google properties.
SUNIL SAHA
Focus on ideas and yet still be 
skeptical of them.
28
What are the metrics you use in measuring your own success? Which ones are the 
highest priority, and why?
Now as CEO, I¡¯ve realized that this is the best training to be a better Product Manager. And to 
be honest, Product Management is great training for becoming a CEO. As CEO, I use look at 
several metrics, but most important in my current startup are ¡­
1. Growth in or toward profitability as a function of ¡­
 a. Revenue growth
 b. Gross margin improvement
 c. Customer acquisition cost
 d. Churn reduction
2. Runway for the company as a function of ¡­
 a. Cash in the bank
 b. Monthly burn rate
3. Market share
4. Customer support satisfaction
SUNIL SAHA
29
SEAN GABRIEL
Program Manager at Microsoft
SEAN¡¯S BACKGROUND
Sean is a Program Manager on the Xbox Music, Video and Ads team. Starting from a hobby-
ist background in web development, he interned as a PM on the Microsoft FrontPage team, 
returning to the Office division for a full-time PM position after graduating. He was a PM 
for several teams in Office, contributing to areas like human workflow and classroom educa-
tion, before joining the Xbox division to build multimedia experiences. On the side, he¡¯s also 
moonlighted for a startup focused on structured debates. Sean graduated with a B.S. degree 
in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from UC Berkeley and has been a PM at Mi-
crosoft for almost seven years.
SUMMARY OF SEAN¡¯S INTERVIEW 
 
In his interview, Sean covers:
? How Microsoft¡¯s PM role differs from other companies 
? What he¡¯s learned from the mistakes he¡¯s made
? Whether you should jump into a PM role immediately after graduation
? And more!
Read on to learn more from Sean!
30
SEAN¡¯S ANSWERS
Can you explain the PM role at Microsoft? Why is the PM role at Microsoft known as 
the ¡°Program Manager¡± and how do you think it compares to similar roles at other 
companies?
Here at Microsoft, we separate the roles of Program Manager and Product Manager. Product 
Manager is a role within marketing and it¡¯s usually a less technical role focused on strategy, 
vision, delivering products to market, and sustaining business growth long-term. 
There are elements of this in the Program Manager role, but another part of it is collaborating 
with the team that is actually building the product and shepherding them toward their mis-
sion. There¡¯s a mix of high-level vision as well as day-to-day work with developers and testers 
to build the product. Here at Microsoft, Program Managers get to own the use scenarios, de-
fining what a feature in the software should do. We get a lot of space and freedom to own the 
feature, figure out what needs to be done, and make mistakes along the way. 
The big deliverable for a Program Manager at Microsoft is the functional spec, defining every-
thing that the feature needs to do to satisfy the user¡¯s needs, how it will work, how it will be 
built, and justifications for all decisions.
Why do you think the Program Manager is important to a team?
A team without a PM is going to be very heavily 
focused on execution but may not know if they 
are going in the right direction. The big value a 
PM provides is being a strong customer advocate, 
helping people gut check: Are we going in the right 
direction? Are we addressing the market? Are we 
being competitive? Are we relevant to the customer? We have PMs on almost every team at 
Microsoft to ensure that the precious time we spend coding features is what the market wants 
and needs.
The PM is often the jack-of-all-trades, master of none. We do a lot of talking to customers, 
either through customer interviews, internal dogfooding, and/or collaboration with user re-
searchers. I once went to Oklahoma City to visit a SharePoint customer. The company was 
an energy company, and we learned how SharePoint was critical to getting energy to a lot of 
people. At the site visit, I got to see how our customers were really using our technology and 
how we could improve our technology to make people¡¯s jobs work better. 
What is your experience with making mistakes as a PM?
I make mistakes everyday. Now that Microsoft is beginning to move more quickly, on a more 
The PM is often the jack-of-all-
trades, master of none.
31
agile development process, I have the flexibility to fail every day. Because we¡¯re doing every-
thing in bite-sized chunks, we can more quickly adapt to whatever is changing around us. 
That¡¯s not a specific answer, but I think it¡¯s important. We used to make much larger mistakes 
and paid a lot for them in the past. Now, as a company moving more quickly, we know it¡¯s 
okay to make mistakes, but we should recover from them more quickly. It¡¯s better to make a 
bite-sized mistake that will only sting a little, rather than chewing your foot off and taking a 
long time to recover.
How has your role as a PM been changing over the last 7 years?
Some things are constant, such as the po-
sition you¡¯re in and the way you interact 
with people; the PM is often known as the 
¡°glue¡± that holds the team together. What 
has changed is the types of people I work 
with, the disciplines they¡¯re from, and how 
many of them are there. This changes depending on the team I¡¯m on, the part of the product 
cycle we¡¯re in, and other factors. The particulars of my role have changed, but the general idea 
of what I do hasn¡¯t changed much. And as you become more senior on teams, your scope of 
responsibility increases, where you become responsible for larger features. PMs at a higher 
level of the company do the same thing as individual contributor PMs, just at a much larger 
scale.
What specific skills do you think make a good PM and how do you develop these 
skills?
I break down the PM role into pillars of design, communication, and execution.
1. Communication: This is tricky. Anyone can tell whether or not it¡¯s working, but it¡¯s hard 
to explain why or how. This is the hardest one to teach. You have to like people. That¡¯s 
very important for a PM. This doesn¡¯t necessarily mean you have to be outgoing or socia-
ble. But you do have to be able to orchestrate people and rally them around your cause. 
2. Execution: Attention to detail. The buck stops with you. Be aware of your accountabilities, 
who is responsible for what, and don¡¯t be afraid to speak up when something needs to be 
done.
3. Design: There are usually rules and constraints to get you started with design. It¡¯s very im-
portant here to have user empathy, being able to channel your customers and understand 
their needs. This ends with delivering a functional spec, stating your design and how it 
will work. In the end, it always comes back to the customer. You have to prove that what 
you¡¯re doing is better for the customer. You are on the team as the customer¡¯s advocate.
SEAN GABRIEL
The big value a PM provides is being 
a strong customer advocate.
32
What advice do you have for pushing your ideas forward as a young PM or even as 
an intern?
Interns are my favorite, because interns have an immunity card. Interns are immune to poli-
tics, to the pressures of the schedule beyond your 12-week internship. If you¡¯re a young PM, 
don¡¯t be afraid of your lack of experience. People hired you for a reason, because you show 
promise, and they want to see you put that to the test. You¡¯re not entrenched in office politics, 
so you should feel free to speak their mind. 
The challenge for interns while they¡¯re here is to be able to make a big impact, not just on your 
own team. There are a lot of resources and people here to talk to and toss ideas around with, 
so make the most of it. How can you make everything happen in just twelve weeks? It starts 
with being confident and not being afraid to speak up and get stuff done.
What criteria do you use to measure your own success as a PM?
I firmly believe in the concept of the PM as the ¡°ser-
vant leader¡± of the team. You¡¯re given the mantel-
piece to drive design and requirements, but at the 
end of the day you need to go convince other peo-
ple who you are not the boss of to go do the things 
you want them to do. So every day, I look around 
me and ask, ¡°Are people around me happy?¡± If they¡¯re not, especially regarding the things 
in my control, I might not be doing my job well. Are my developers happy? Are my testers 
happy? Are my leads happy? If everyone seems like they don¡¯t need me, then that¡¯s an ideal 
situation. It means I¡¯ve done a good enough job selling the idea to them, and they will just run 
with it and work it out.
Long term, I measure success in terms of the scope of what I¡¯m working on. Beyond just pro-
motions and levels, I¡¯m excited about being able to work on the size of problems and types of 
problems I¡¯m interested in. Now that I¡¯m working in Xbox on consumer technology, I feel like 
I¡¯m in the place of my own personal passion, and I think that¡¯s a good place to be.
Would you recommend jumping into a PM role immediately after graduation or be-
ginning with another role such as developer or designer first?
This is an age-old question: Who¡¯s the better PM, the one who started as a PM or the one who 
did something else first? In my experience, I¡¯ve seen both be wildly successful. There¡¯s a cer-
tain skillset that makes good PMs, and if you have it, then that¡¯s all you need to make it here.
I would say it¡¯s important to understand other disciplines so that your team can understand 
that you¡¯ve been in their shoes. It helps if you have a technical background (basic scripting is 
sufficient programming experience for most PMs) so that you have a sense of what the team 
is talking about when you¡¯re staring at their screens figuring out an issue. I don¡¯t think you 
SEAN GABRIEL
[The PM is] the ¡°servant leader¡± 
of the team.
33
need to have done a ton of programming before being a PM, but it¡¯s good to have a little bit 
of exposure.
Diversity of experience among PMs is important, too, because you can bring your area of ex-
pertise, whether it¡¯s technical, business, or design, to the team. This creates a wealth of opin-
ions, which means more and better ideas.
Imagine you¡¯re at an elementary school on Career Day. How do you explain to the 
kids what a Program Manager does?
I would tell people that I¡¯m a Jedi knight. Being a 
PM means seeing your ideas and creations take a 
life of their own. A lot of what the PM does is get-
ting the ball rolling and seeing everyone that you 
work with take the ball and carry it over the finish 
line. It¡¯s kind of like Jedi mind tricks, getting people 
to do cool things without forcing them to do it. Almost like inception.
SEAN GABRIEL
The work of a PM is kind of 
like doing Jedi mind tricks.
34
DAVID SHEIN
Product Manager at Facebook
DAVID¡¯S BACKGROUND
David graduated in 2009 with an undergraduate degree in quantitative economics. He then 
spent two years at the Kansas Federal Reserve doing macroeconomic research. Most recently, 
David has spent the past two years working in corporate finance at McKinsey and Company.
Although he has a deep interest in technology, he does not have any direct coding experience.
He just transitioned from his role at McKinsey to work as a Product Manager at Facebook this 
August in their RPM program (rotation PM program).
SUMMARY OF DAVID¡¯S INTERVIEW
 
In his following interview, David discusses:
? Why he transitioned from consulting to Product Management
? How he landed a job as a PM at Facebook without a technical background
? How to excel as a non-technical PM
? And more!
Read on to learn more from David!
35
DAVID¡¯S ANSWERS
What made you decide on transitioning from consulting to Product Management?
I came about this role in a rather serendipitous way. I wasn¡¯t actively looking into becoming 
a Product Manager, but Facebook had reached out to McKinsey about consultants that might 
be interested in a potential role at Facebook.
This surprised me because most Product Managers tend to have backgrounds as engineers, 
designers, CEOs, or COOs. I was able to fortunately secure a position and was hired by Face-
book to become a Product Manager.
In your opinion, what are the goals and purpose of Product Managers?
I think that Product Management roles are 
about aligning resources, the user experi-
ence, a deep understanding of the customer, 
and the market. That generally means that 
even if you don¡¯t have to have a technical 
background, you should still understand the 
language and be able to engage intelligently with your team members who are from different 
backgrounds.
In addition to the above, two more points that I would say are heavily important are:
1. Understand the product that you¡¯re dealing with at a very intimate level. That means un-
derstanding how people interact with your product to a very deep degree. You need to 
understand how they¡¯re understanding the product and their goals and frustrations. 
2. Learn how to communicate effectively. You¡¯re going to have to come in and rely upon the 
engineers to do the coding, so you need to make sure you can easily explain what you¡¯re 
trying to get done and what you need to get done. 
Ultimately, I think that the primary goal would be to actually ship a product.
As someone who doesn¡¯t come from a background of engineering, what are your 
thoughts on working as a Product Manager at a heavily technical company?
I don¡¯t think that my lack of a technical background will hinder my ability to excel. When I 
was learning more about the potential of the role, I asked myself: Could I really succeed with-
out a technical background? I heard from Facebook that they actually had confidence that I 
could.
When speaking with other people without a technical background who had joined the pro-
gram the prior year and were successful the key was not about understanding how the indi-
Understand the product that you¡¯re 
dealing with at a very intimate level.
36
vidual lines of code are written, but learning to speak the language of engineers and designers 
as well as effectively allocating and leveraging resources across the organization
One thing that was suggested was to quickly learn how to ask the right questions and speak 
the right lingo.
For example, if Facebook is looking to release a new feature, as a Product Manager, you need 
to be able to understand when people you¡¯re working with start explaining the implementa-
tion and design choices behind various components of features. I don¡¯t think you necessarily 
need to understand the detailed technical implementation, but you do need to be up to par in 
the language and terminology used in the discussion so you can understand and contribute.
None of this is to say that it still isn¡¯t great to have a technical background going in. It¡¯s just 
meant to show that it may not be completely necessary to have been an engineer or designer 
prior to stepping into a Product Management role.
What are some examples of strategies you prepared for securing a role as a Product 
Manager at technology companies?
Broadly speaking, it was three points. First 
off, I spent a lot of time learning a lot about 
the product. I delved into the product both at 
the front end and back end (e.g., when look-
ing at Facebook Places, what could be added 
to it and how would it need to grow to help 
deliver a new and differentiated impact to people). Secondly, I sat back and thought strategi-
cally about how I would actually use this product (e.g., how do I use Graph Search on a daily 
basis). Thirdly and finally, I took a macro-level view and thought about the scope and scale 
of the product (e.g., what products does Facebook currently not have in the market and what 
would I add to their product portfolio if hired tomorrow).
Thinking about a product at these three levels, from the highest view to the lowest, will help 
you understand the product at a deep enough level to make some reasoned and intelligent 
judgments about the product you¡¯re working with.
DAVID SHEIN
Quickly learn how to ask the right 
questions and speak the right lingo.
37
PAUL ROSANIA
Senior Product Manager at Twitter
PAUL¡¯S BACKGROUND
Paul graduated CS from Dartmouth in 2005. He did consulting for a few years, before starting 
a business called CollegeJobConnect. It ended up failing, but through the process he got a call 
from a notable Silicon Valley founder, who had heard of Paul and wanted to see if he would 
be a good fit to join their startup as the first Growth Hacker.
Paul said yes, moved out to SV in 2011 and spent 1 year working there.
He then got a call from Twitter; he had been able to 10x growth at the startup, doing both en-
gineering and product strategy, but realized that he wanted to move to more of a pure prod-
uct-related role, and to try his skills on a much bigger stage. So he accepted Twitter¡¯s offer and 
has now been at Twitter about 10 months.
You can follow Paul on Twitter at @ptr.
SUMMARY OF PAUL¡¯S INTERVIEW
 
In this following interview, Paul shares his insights on:
? How Product Managers are like sports coaches
? What it means to be an advocate for the user
? The 3 most fundamental skills a success PM should have
? The most important thing he¡¯s learned as a PM at Twitter
? And more!
Read on to learn more from Paul!
38
PAUL¡¯S ANSWERS
You¡¯ve had a very interesting background up to your role now at Twitter. Can you talk 
a little bit about how you got to where you are now?
I wandered a bit, early on in my career. Prior to Twitter, I worked as an engineer at two start-
ups, founded one, and also spent three years doing management consulting. At the most re-
cent startup, I was the first person to spend 100% of my time focused on growth. As a result, 
I split my time between product management ¡ª brainstorming, roadmapping, prioritizing, 
etc. ¡ª and engineering.
Coming to Twitter, I chose to go all-in on product management. Twitter¡¯s full of world-class 
engineers, and I felt I had more to add on the product side. I¡¯m a Computer Science major by 
education, but my passion has always been in products, and designing and shipping them 
by any means necessary. Going into Twitter, I wanted to play to those strengths, particularly 
product leadership, long-term planning, and doing what it takes to get things shipped. So I 
decided to do PM at Twitter, initially in Growth. My role at Twitter has evolved over the past 
few months, and rather than being concentrated on Growth I¡¯m starting to spread out and 
work on other things around the company.
In your opinion, what are the goals and purpose of Product Managers? What are 
some of the most valuable skills I could develop in a short-term internship as a 
Product Management Intern?
The exact role of Product Management 
varies from company to company. For 
starters, some companies combine prod-
uct and project management into one 
role. Others split them apart. Those that 
split them have different ways of balanc-
ing the two. With project management, your number one goal is to make sure that the thing 
you¡¯re working on actually ships. With product management, your goal is to make sure you¡¯re 
building the right product, with the right set of priorities, in a manner consistent with compa-
ny goals, while constantly advocating for the user.
At Twitter, we collaborate with Technical Program Managers (TPMs), who are interdisciplin-
ary, but function somewhat like project managers. On our biggest and most complex projects, 
I collaborate with a TPM. On others projects, I take on project management responsibility 
directly.
I think this reflects on an important aspect of success as a PM: doing whatever jobs need doing 
to get your project into your customers¡¯ hands. A big part of my job is doing whatever dirty 
work is necessary so the real work can get done. Often, that means writing email, or repre-
Someone needs to spend every waking 
hour laser-focused on the customer.
39
senting the team in meetings. Whatever makes the process of building software as smooth as 
possible for my team.
Every once in awhile someone I hear someone ask if PMs are really necessary. After all, I work 
with a lot of engineers who have a strong intuitive sense for what a good product looks like. 
But if an engineer asks me, I tend to ask in return, ¡°Do you want to spend your time building? 
Or do you want to spend your time doing all the planning and coordinating?¡± A lot goes into 
shipping products, beyond writing code and having an eye for quality.
When you¡¯re engrossed in building software, 
you don¡¯t always get direct exposure to users 
themselves. Part of a PM¡¯s job is to remain con-
nected to the people who live with the product 
you ship. At Twitter this is particularly challeng-
ing ¡ª with 200 million active users, it¡¯s really 
hard to infer what people want, just by using 
your gut or conversations with a few friends. It¡¯s just not a representative sample.
So it takes some time to develop the right mental frame to start to design our products in the 
right way, and this frame is a critical aspect of a PM¡¯s value. I think you could fire all the PM¡¯s 
at Twitter, or at most companies, and not notice anything wrong for a couple months. And 
then you¡¯d notice what you¡¯re building is losing traction in the market, or you¡¯re shipping fea-
tures your users don¡¯t care about. Someone needs to spend every waking hour laser-focused 
on the customer. PM¡¯s keep you honest on that front.
One last thing on being a great PM, by way of analogy. A PM is like a sports coach. You don¡¯t 
manage the players directly or negotiate their contracts. All of your influence is indirect. Your 
success, and ultimately your team¡¯s success, lies in your ability to lead. If the players don¡¯t 
respect you, your job becomes impossible.
Great PMs guide their teams to success, without ever setting foot on the metaphorical playing 
field. They are the glue that sticks the team together, empowers them to succeed, and keeps 
them focused on the goal.
As for skills to focus on, I think there are three fundamentals: organization, communication, 
and thought leadership.
Organization is the key to success. It¡¯s trite, but true. I mentioned earlier that the PM does 
whatever it takes to ship product, and part of doing that is not forgetting what needs to be 
done. Figure out a way to organize your thoughts, questions, and to-dos. I¡¯ve spent a lot of 
time creating a system that works for me, and I refine it constantly. Ultimately, this means my 
manager can trust me to get things done without oversight, and my team knows when they 
pass things to me they don¡¯t have to worry about whether I¡¯ll follow up.
Communication helps indirectly. To be effective as a PM, you need to be perceived as a reli-
able hub for your product. Otherwise, people will go directly to members of your team, dis-
tracting them and slowing your project. At a minimum this means prompt, clear and succinct 
responses to questions. (And a lot of email!) At the next level, this means laying out and evan-
gelizing the medium and long term goals and roadmap for your project. When people know 
Make sure that you¡¯re building 
the right product and advocating 
for the user.
PAUL ROSANIA
40
what you¡¯re planning to do and why, they¡¯re more likely to leave you alone and let you and 
your team execute your vision.
Thought leadership means knowing your product and industry cold, and having a clear and 
passionate vision for where you want your product to go. This might seem like the most 
important thing, but without organization and communication, you¡¯re faced with shoddy 
thought leadership, or a beautiful roadmap no one knows about or respects.
What do you mean by being an ¡®advocate for the user¡¯?
Let me give you a specific example from Twitter. Think 
about our signup process for a second. Everyone who 
uses Twitter can explain intuitively why you need to have 
a username. Without one, no one could find your profile 
to follow you, and there would be no way to @-mention 
you. But if you talk to potential users, you encounter peo-
ple who have no idea why the signup process is the way it is. What¡¯s a username? Why would 
I need one?
Eventually, you start to identify patterns in user feedback, where your customer doesn¡¯t have 
the same understanding of your product that you think they do. As a PM, it¡¯s your job to iden-
tify these patterns. Over time, the patterns form into broad intuitions about how users will 
approach your product, and you surprise yourself by guessing user feedback before you hear 
it. This is what I mean by advocating for the user. It¡¯s my job to make sure that we don¡¯t lose 
the broader customer experience.
As a new PM, your intuition will be raw, but you can overcome that by talking to customers. 
At first, the patterns you find will be simple: people struggle with passwords. But over time, 
you start to detect broader heuristics: web forms can never be too simple or straightforward. 
You start to connect these heuristics to each other, and generalize. Through repetition and 
generalization, these heuristics build a foundation for intuitive product sense.
What do you do as a PM at Twitter to make sure you¡¯re consistently in tune and em-
pathizing with the end users?
There are many tactics, but only one strategy: talk to your users.
We¡¯re a little spoiled at Twitter, because we have a dedicated user research team keeping us 
connected to our audience. I immerse myself in their results whenever I can. This luxury is 
dangerous though, since it¡¯s indirect. As a PM, it¡¯s easy to interpret research results abstractly, 
and start to think of users in terms of cohorts and percentages.
Quantitative data is critical, but it¡¯s also critical to stay connected to real humans who use 
your software. I also volunteer occasionally, helping people with computer-related issues, and 
there are often questions about Twitter. It¡¯s fascinating to watch people do even the simplest 
things, like logging in. Many people will do basic things like repeatedly type their password 
Don¡¯t lose the broader 
customer experience.
PAUL ROSANIA
41
wrong. After a few tries, they might even conclude that there¡¯s a bug with Twitter instead of 
realizing that they¡¯ve just been typing their password wrong the whole time.
These are legitimate user problems, and it helps to be there with them to witness it first hand. 
Otherwise it feels too abstract. We¡¯re humans after all.
So I think empathy is the right word, but at the same time I don¡¯t think you can identify all of 
these things just by being empathetic.
I envy teams whose customers arrive with credit cards in hand. Paying customers are either 
happy or angrily calling demanding to deliver feedback to you. It¡¯s painful to hear it some-
times, but at least they¡¯re giving explicit feedback. I don¡¯t ever get that, and I can¡¯t just call up a 
handful of our 200+ million users hoping to get an accurate representation of the user base. So 
I have a particular challenge understanding the ¡®average¡¯ user. This is where our user research 
team really saves the day. They conduct studies of all sizes, drilling in on all kinds of problems 
in a way that accurately represents our massive user base.
What would you say is one of the most important things you¡¯ve learned as a Product 
Manager at Twitter?
I used to catch myself asking other people questions when I already knew what they were 
going to say. Or I would have a tingling sense in the back of my brain that something was off 
with a deliverable. For example, someone might ask me what the next steps for a project are. 
I¡¯d write a few bullets into an email, and as I hit ¡°send¡± I would already know exactly the first 
question they were going to ask. But I wouldn¡¯t write it in, maybe out of laziness. Without 
fail, they would ask that follow-up question. And all you can think about to yourself in that 
moment is, ¡°How did I know and why didn¡¯t I answer it?¡±
I encountered this a lot in my early career, but once I be-
came a PM, I knew I had to fix it fundamentally. For PMs, 
it¡¯s a critical failure. You really need to guard against it. 
You¡¯re expected to be the person who notices incomplete 
work, when you do it and when other people do it. Other-
wise you will ship an A- product. You¡¯ll know in your heart it¡¯s an A- and it will end up being 
an A-. As a PM, that¡¯s unacceptable. The buck stops with you.
You can¡¯t count on someone else calling you out if your product is subpar. You were hired to 
be the arbiter of that, and other people won¡¯t even necessarily know the right questions to ask.
What are some of your responsibilities as a Product Manager at Twitter?
I mentioned earlier that organization, communication, and thought leadership are great skills 
to develop. These are some of the cornerstone responsibilities of a PM at Twitter.
Diligence is another responsibility of every PM. The product you build is a reflection of you 
and the effort you put into it. That means being honest (and sometimes critical) with yourself, 
The buck stops with you.
PAUL ROSANIA
42
your team and your work. A good PM wants to do what¡¯s right, even when it hurts. That 
means doing homework and proving to yourself and others that your product is as good as 
you think it is, and your vision is ¡®correct¡¯.
For me, this level of diligence was unnatural at first. There¡¯s so much stuff that happens each 
day that your memory gets overloaded easily. I quickly realized I had to stop trying to keep 
everything in my head. I had a couple instances where I forgot to do something I¡¯ d been asked 
to do, or where I stepped into a meeting and realized I hadn¡¯t planned out what I was going 
to say as much as I thought.
Nowadays I write everything down immediately, even if I plan to do it right away. For simple 
tasks, I use Things.app on my Mac. When I meet with someone, I jot down notes in Evernote 
as we talk. As a result, I never forget to do things, and I never forget conversations with team 
members. When I have product ideas I jot them into a running Google Doc for the project. 
This system frees my mind from remembering things, and lets me concentrate on organizing 
and planning without wasted cycles trying to remember things.
I also find that writing helps me keep myself honest: sometimes an idea that seems crisp in 
your head is hard to explain in prose. That¡¯s a sign your thinking isn¡¯t yet complete.
One last thing I want to say is that as a PM, you don¡¯t 
have a ton of control or flexibility over your own 
time. You¡¯re often at the beck-and-call of meetings, 
email and questions from other people. It¡¯s tempting 
to fight back, but these obstacles are actually a part 
of the job. Be honest about whether each meeting is 
important, but also realize that by having distrac-
tion-filled days, you¡¯re clearing distractions from your team. (And sometimes these meetings 
help you collect information that keeps you alters your roadmap and keeps you focused on 
the right goals, which saves time in the long run.)
If you¡¯re feeling overwhelmed, don¡¯t be afraid to block off time to do long-term thinking. I put 
one-to-two hour blocks on my calendar a few days a week when I¡¯m busy, to make sure I have 
time to think. You need time to synthesize your thoughts, and if you don¡¯t reserve that time 
other people will take it from you.
I can program in Python and R, but don¡¯t have as concrete of development experi-
ence as I¡¯ve heard many PMs have. As someone who has somewhat of a technical 
background, what are some things I can do to compensate for this?
Having a strong engineering background helps you as a PM in two ways.
First, it helps you build a strong rapport with your engineers.  If you can walk the walk, 
they¡¯re more likely to trust you to make judgment calls on their behalf, and not to overprom-
ise when they¡¯re out of earshot.  You¡¯re also less likely to put your foot in your mouth talking 
about the details of something you¡¯re asking them to build.
Second, having a strong engineering background helps you estimate, which in turn allows 
you to better coach your team by sniffing out opportunities to push them to new levels of per-
A good PM wants to do what¡¯s 
right, not boss people around.
PAUL ROSANIA
43
formance. When you work with a really great team, and you know when to push, everyone 
grows and your team, your company, and you all benefit.
So to compensate for a lack of concrete experience, brainstorm ways to accomplish these 
goals.  Find opportunities to hack on projects, ideally by writing code alongside your team.  
At Twitter we have quarterly Hack Weeks, which are a great chance for me to stretch myself 
and prove my mettle to the team I count on.
I¡¯m concerned about the level of impact I can have in just 3 months at a company. I 
want to learn a lot, and think I will, but I also want to get a chance to actually make an 
impact. How did you spend your first 3 months in your first PM role, and what would 
you do differently if you could redo it?
I got my hands dirty right away, and I recommend 
the same.  At Twitter, we always look for intern 
projects that are substantial in size, allow the in-
tern to really ¡°own¡± something they can drive to 
completion on their own (with guidance), and are shippable in the 3 months they¡¯re on site.  
Oh, and always, always real projects.  No practice projects or busywork.
Hopefully your company lays out the same opportunities for you, but if they don¡¯t do it 
instinctively, speak up!  You¡¯re right that there¡¯s a chance you won¡¯t make an impact.  But 
you definitely can, I¡¯ve seen big impacts time and again from interns here.  Make sure you¡¯re 
working on a real thing that¡¯s likely to ship before you leave, that you can point to when 
you¡¯re gone.
What are some mental models you use to view the quality of an educational prod-
uct? In other words, what are the criteria you use for judging how successful a 
product is?
I don¡¯t have specific background in educational software, but I can speak generally:  Build a 
product users love. Talk to them, listen to their feedback. State the problems you are trying to 
solve clearly, up front, and always from the user¡¯s perspective. Break things down. Focus on 
high leverage projects first.  Ship.
I highly recommend reading Inspired by Marty Cagan.  It¡¯s a quick read, and it will help you 
develop a framework for approaching product development.
I¡¯ve often heard the advice that I should do a ¡°technical¡± job first for a few years be-
fore jumping into PM, because it¡¯s hard to switch back to a ¡°technical¡± job (such as 
programming, designing) after doing a PM role. What do you think of this advice? Is 
it a good idea to jump right into the PM role after graduation, or is it better to do a 
regular role first and move in to the PM role?
The best career advice I ever received was, ¡°you can¡¯t do what you want by doing something 
PAUL ROSANIA
I got my hands dirty right away.
44
else.¡± Do what you love. Worry less about a hypothetical career switch. If your passion really 
is in product management, you won¡¯t leave it.
(Oh, and the world is clamoring for talented designers and engineers. If you need to make that 
switch later, you¡¯ll find work.)
PAUL ROSANIA
45
LAYLA AMJADI
Product Manager at Facebook
LAYLA¡¯S BACKGROUND
Layla was most recently a Senior Associate Consultant at The Bridgespan Group, a manage-
ment consulting firm that serves the nonprofit sector. At Bridgespan she built significant ex-
pertise in philanthropy and served as the Product Manager on a groundbreaking philanthro-
py video series titled ¡°Conversations with Remarkable Givers.¡± The series features original 
interviews with 60 impressive philanthropists, including David Rubenstein, Pierre Omidyar, 
and Melinda Gates. Clients from her casework included organizations, such as the United 
Nations Foundation and Facing History and Ourselves. 
Layla has also interned at Procter & Gamble in marketing and at the US Department of State 
in the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. She dedicated the majority of her un-
dergraduate career to serving on the national managing committee of STAND, the student-led 
division of the Genocide Intervention Network, which organizes hundreds of high school and 
college chapters in to stop and prevent genocide. She was elected as the organization¡¯s Exec-
utive Director in her senior year.
Layla graduated from Harvard University with a B.A. in Government in 2010 and speaks Far-
si and Spanish. She can be followed on Twitter at @LaylaAmjadi. 
SUMMARY OF LAYLA¡¯S INTERVIEW
 
In her following interview, Layla shares her thoughts on:
? How to influence her team without authority
? The most valuable skill all PM¡¯s should know
? What is unique about being a female Product Manager
? And more!
Read on to learn more from Layla!
46
LAYLA¡¯S ANSWERS
Can you talk a little bit about your background and what led you to product manage-
ment?
I graduated from Harvard in 2010 and had spent the majority of my undergrad working with 
a non-profit organization called STAND (The Student-Led Division of the Genocide Interven-
tion Network). STAND mobilizes hundreds of college and high school chapters on genocide 
prevention advocacy. 
While at STAND, I served as its National Programming Director in my junior year and the 
Executive Director in my senior year. Throughout it all, I had the opportunity to work on 
campaigns, websites, and events in a cross-functional role. I really enjoyed being able to work 
with policy experts and grassroots organizes on one day, and web developers the next for any 
given initiative. It was challenging, exciting, and I was always learning from my teammates. 
So when it came time for my internship before my 
senior year, I went looking for a role that would 
emulate that cross-functional, hub-of-the-wheel 
experience, which is why I pursued brand man-
agement at Procter & Gamble. At P&G I got to 
work with sales, R&D, PR, agency partners, busi-
ness analysts, and point-of-purchase experts, so I 
definitely got the cross-functional experience I wanted, but something didn¡¯t click for me. Part 
of it was that I wasn¡¯t necessarily connecting to my product (cleaners) or ¡°her¡± (40 year old 
moms), and another part was that P&G was a hierarchical environment that was a bit slow 
moving and risk averse. I was the only undergraduate intern in the program, so I had plenty 
of MBA intern mentors over that summer, and they recommended that I look into manage-
ment consulting to expose myself to different types of organizations and really build up my 
quantitative and strategic background. I took their advice and ended up going to work for The 
Bridgespan Group, a non-profit consulting firm that was incubated at Bain & Company and 
co-founded by Bain¡¯s former Managing Director. Interestingly, it was this consulting job that 
opened the opportunity for me to work in a product management role.
Bridgespan was given a large, multi-year grant from a prominent foundation to develop the 
Give Smart initiative, an effort to support philanthropists to give effectively and accountably. 
Part one of this initiative was the Give Smart book. Part two was an original video series show-
casing the wisdom of 60 high-net-worth philanthropists from around the country. We devel-
oped a TED Talks-like content platform with about 1,500 video clips, featuring 1-3 minute 
sound bites from philanthropists like Melinda Gates, Michael J. Fox, Julian Robertson, Tom 
Steyer, and David Rubenstein on a range of topics. I was more-or-less a Product Manager on 
the video project. 
So ultimately, through helping to build and populate this platform over the past 1.5 years at 
Bridgespan, I came to really love the PM role as a I had come to understand it. Now I¡¯ll be 
I came to really love the PM role 
as I had come to understand it.
47
transitioning onwards to starting as a Product Manager at Facebook in August.
How did this transition happen?
As an organization grows, it can begin to take more risks on the types of people it hires for 
any given role. I saw this in my consulting cases. I can imagine as Facebook has grown there¡¯s 
been room to hire more people from different backgrounds for the PM role. I can see how 
having a management consulting background as a PM would be helpful, because I think, at 
its core, it¡¯s a strategic role. 
If you were standing in a first-grade classroom and had to explain to the students 
what a Product Manager is, what would you tell them?
I would use the example of a puzzle and say 
that a Product Manager works with a team to 
decide what a puzzle will assemble to look like 
when it is completed. Then the Product Man-
ager works with the team to break it apart and 
jumps in whenever necessary to help team-
mates with their pieces. The PM then focuses 
on working with the team to put the puzzle back together in a timely and efficient manner. 
From my experience, as a Product Manager, you help your team decide the best way to spend 
their time and resources on a project and keep everyone pumped along the way.
From your experience at Bridgespan, what were some of the most valuable things 
you learned about succeeding as a Product Manager?
The  three major takeaways from my first PM experience were: 
1. Avoid ¡°nice-to-haves¡±: As a PM, part of your job to make sure that the team is and feels 
like they are using their limited time efficiently. This means avoiding workstreams that 
are ¡°nice-to-have¡¯s¡± that won¡¯t necessarily change the the ¡°answer¡± or the direction of the 
product. Understanding what is a ¡°nice-to-have¡± requires going through the hypotheti-
cals. If a proposed piece of work could lead to ¡°X¡±  or ¡°Y¡± results, but we also know that 
regardless of ¡°X¡± or ¡°Y¡± result, we¡¯d still do ¡°Z¡±, then that research might not be worth the 
time. It doesn¡¯t change the answer. But you have to weigh the pros and cons and balance 
efficiency with efficacy. Sometimes a workstream might not immediately impact a product 
in the short run, but could build knowledge that will be useful down-the-line, or it could 
be a way to satisfy the team¡¯s intellectual curiosity. So its not always cut and dry. There 
are tradeoffs. 
2. Influence without authority : This is a key part of being a Product Manager, and is admit-
tedly a very difficult thing to learn how to do well. As a PM you are coordinating a team 
of peers. You are working with other cross-functionals in the organization who might not 
LAYLA AMJADI
A PM works with a team to decide 
what a puzzle will assemble to 
look like when it¡¯s completed.
48
even have a time allocation for your product. You¡¯re not the boss. But, you are responsi-
ble for executing the vision. So how do you navigate this? When I was working on the 
Give Smart video project, this happened very naturally (it¡¯s important to be genuine) but I 
built very strong, one-on-one relationships with each of my teammates on the project and 
throughout the organization. I came to understand how important the project was for the 
person given all the other work they have going on. You have to remember, just because 
you are working 100% on something, doesn¡¯t mean everyone else is. So you have to under-
stand the full set of projects someone has on their plate so you can help them prioritize. I 
came to understand their likes, dislikes, what motivates them, what frustrates them. Hav-
ing a really comprehensive understanding of the ¡°John the whole person / professional¡± 
not just ¡°John the PR expert I need something from¡± is the only way to be successful in 
¡°Influencing Without Authority.¡± You can¡¯t just think about what¡¯s in it for you all the 
time. What¡¯s in it for them? What do they need? What do they want to learn? Having this 
mindset is key to being successful in a working relationship where the person you need 
something from doesn¡¯t have to do it.
3. Overinvest in communication: Whenever I join 
a new team, I overinvest in communication at the 
beginning. This isn¡¯t because I¡¯m trying to mi-
cromanage the situation. It¡¯s because I¡¯m trying 
to sync up our brains. I want to understand my 
team member¡¯s thought processes, biases, values, 
and expertise. I want to get to a point where I can 
anticipate what each team member¡¯s stance would be on a particular decision or what area 
of the decision they would definitely want to weigh in on. I get to this point by constantly 
asking ¡°Why?¡± This way, I can  understand their points-of-view and if they happen to not 
be in the room at some decision-point, I can still represent their thoughts and advocate for 
them. This does two things -- it builds trust between me and my teammates, and at the 
same time it increases efficiency on the backend. Trust amongst teammates, I believe, leads 
to faster, better results. To illustrate, if John is going into a meeting with Jen about X deci-
sion, and I know John knows how I think and the calls I¡¯d make, I don¡¯t need to be in the 
meeting, and I can repurpose my time in a way that would better benefit the team¡¯s needs. 
What are some things you would say are in common with what you did at a non-prof-
it like BridgeSpan and what Product Managers at technology companies might do? 
At Bridgespan, I learned a very valuable skill that I think all Product Managers need to learn 
to do: how to carefully say ¡°No.¡± This was very difficult for me to get comfortable with, espe-
cially since I was the most junior person on the team and managing-up four senior leadership 
members. 
One story that illustrates this is when a partner wanted a very specific video-feature for the 
website. He was very adamant that having this feature was a crucial part of the experience. 
But my team and I didn¡¯t believe that we had the capacity to execute on the newly proposed 
feature, and we didn¡¯t think that it would dramatically change the user experience. It wouldn¡¯t 
LAYLA AMJADI
You¡¯re not the boss. But you 
are responsible for executing 
the vision.
49
¡°change the answer.¡± So through bringing the facts to the table (i.e., this is how many resourc-
es it would take and this is how many resources we have available), we were able to objective-
ly say ¡®no.¡¯ 
I think this story shows that as a Product Manager, you¡¯re likely in a high-energy place and 
there are probably many people around you who are highly-skilled and have many great 
ideas. But as a Product Manager, one of your jobs is to promote and feed this excited energy, 
but channel it effectively, which will most likely require saying ¡®No¡¯ to some of these ideas.
Yet there¡¯s nothing less empowering than saying ¡®No¡¯ to people all the time. To counteract 
this, one of the most valuable things you can do at the beginning of any project is to work with 
your team to develop a set of project priorities. As a team, you can evaluate new ideas against 
this framework and decide in an objective fashion which ideas should be pursued. You give 
everyone the ¡°saying no¡± responsibility in this way. 
Thinking about this from the other side, I also learned 
how to make it clear that I was keeping track of every-
one¡¯s ideas. We had a team whiteboard that contained 
an idea bank that everyone contributed to. Having this 
be a public, visible bank of ideas showed my team that 
I hadn¡¯t forgotten what they had mentioned, and that I 
was actively looking for opportunities (i.e., time and resources) to make their ideas happen. 
You need to show people that you are listening to their ideas, even if you have to say ¡®no¡¯ for 
the time being. 
Do you think there is anything particularly unique about being a woman in Product 
Management? Do you have any advice you would give to women who aspired to 
work as Product Managers?
Honestly, I¡¯ve never felt evaluated by my peers on the axis of ¡®Woman¡¯ v. ¡®Non-Woman.¡¯ I 
think the bias that I felt a lot more was more along the lines of ¡®Technical v. Non-Technical.¡¯
In terms of advice I would give to others, I think that being a woman should be embraced as 
an advantage. As a woman, you have a unique set of traits and abilities. You¡¯re naturally detail 
oriented and zoned-in on people¡¯s thought processes. These are strengths to be leveraged, and 
I¡¯ve never felt disadvantaged because I¡¯m a woman. Finally, many technical products have 
user bases that are > 50% female. Having a woman¡¯s opinion in the room is important and 
valued.
You mentioned that you feel pressure along the ¡®Technical v. Non-Technical¡¯ axis. 
As someone who doesn¡¯t have a technical background, what are your thoughts on 
doing Product Management at a very engineering-driven company like Facebook?
I think that whatever job you¡¯re in, you should always play to your strengths and try to sur-
round yourself with those who can educate you and compensate for your weaknesses.
LAYLA AMJADI
All PMs need to learn how 
to carefully say ¡°No.¡±
50
My strength is that I can coordinate the execution of a project with a timeline, and I¡¯ve been 
told that I can keep people excited along the way, motivating them to do their best work. As 
a choreographer, dancer, and amateur interior designer, photographer, and artist, I have also 
developed a good gut for design and flow. So I¡¯m confident and comfortable in these areas. 
Facebook has such strong teams of engineers that I¡¯m not worried about not having a techni-
cal background. Plus, as a PM you¡¯re not telling engineers how to do their job, you are unlock-
ing their knowledge and bringing it to bear when its time to make decisions. 
What advice would you give to someone looking to work as a Product Manager com-
ing from a non-technical perspective?
Do your homework; be a sponge. Go to extra professional development opportunities to get 
up to speed and make sure to become as knowledgeable as possible. Be a learner and respect-
ful. Tell the team you work with that you want to learn from them and you want to grow from 
working with them.
Keep in mind that you¡¯re the coordinator, not the boss of the people you¡¯re working with. Go 
into your role with confidence and humility.
Given that you¡¯ll be starting at Facebook in August, what have you done, and what 
will you be doing to prepare for your new role?
I think that it¡¯s good to have terminology down for someone who¡¯s not as deep in the tech 
world. So keeping up to date on the lingo by reading tech blogs and magazines is really im-
portant. I¡¯ve been also deepening my knowledge about the tech ecosystem and technologies 
that are used.
Finally, I¡¯ve also been an avid user of the prod-
uct. I¡¯ve been building my gut intuition as a 
user and having specific anchor references in 
my head that I can pull up in real-time during 
meetings.
So that means I¡¯ve been spending a lot of time on Google+ and Path and various different 
messenger apps to survey the field and being cognizant of the designs that these apps chose 
compared to the choices Facebook made. It¡¯s very helpful in orienting yourself to understand 
the context these other apps are set in and the tensions they face.
Are there any final thoughts you¡¯d like to share?
Ultimately, my long-term goal is to bring technology and innovation to the problems the non-
profit sector works to solve, because so far scaling nonprofit solutions to social problems has 
proven to be very expensive. Technology can provide that platform for scale. And I also just 
LAYLA AMJADI
Surround yourself with those who 
can educate you and compensate 
for your weaknesses.
51
have a hard time believing that scaling nonprofits, one-by-one, to  $20-30M revenue ceilings is 
going to change the world. All sectors (public, for profit, nonprofit) need to bring their unique 
assets to bear on a problem. For example, CVS is a network of brick and mortar stores in a 
range of communities across the country. CVS is a platform for scale. They rolled out Minute 
Clinics faster than any community health organization could have rolled out their clinics. 
And they are doing their part to increase access to 
lower cost options for health care. And it helps their 
bottom line. Win, win, win. What attracted me to 
Facebook is that it¡¯s also a huge platform for scale, 
they only difference is that users get to decide what 
they¡¯d find most beneficial to roll through the net-
work. 
There aren¡¯t enough technical people in nonprofits. And they¡¯re aren¡¯t enough people who 
are willing to take risks and do something totally out-of-the-box. If more people get into non-
profits with a technology background, I believe that more solutions will reach more people in 
increasingly cost-effective and innovative ways. 
LAYLA AMJADI
There aren¡¯t enough technical 
people in nonprofits.
52
AVICHAL GARG
Product Manager at Facebook
AVICHAL¡¯S BACKGROUND
Avichal is a product manager on Facebook¡¯s Platform team working on a new, undisclosed 
product and managing the teams responsible for user facing platform products such as Face-
book Login, social plugins (the Like button on 3rd party sites), and Timeline Collections. Pre-
viously, he was co-founder and CEO of Spool (acquired by Facebook in 2012), co-founder and 
CTO of PrepMe (acquired in 2011 by the Daily Mail Group, LON: DMGT), and was a product 
manager at Google in Search Quality and Ads Quality as well as started Google Transit, one of 
Google Map¡¯s core differentiating features. He has an M.S. and B.S. from Stanford University. 
SUMMARY OF AVICHAL¡¯S INTERVIEW
 
In his following interview, Avichal goes over:
? What it means for a PM to be analytically skilled
? The most unique skill that he has seen a PM have
? How to develop great product sense
? And more!
Read on to learn more from Avichal!
53
AVICHAL¡¯S ANSWERS
In your opinion, what are the goals and purpose of product managers? What are 
some of the most valuable skills that a I could develop in a three-month period as a 
Product Management Intern?
I think that Product Managers play an editorial role on the team. There¡¯s a lot going on when 
you¡¯re trying to get a product out the door, and someone needs to play the editor. Given this 
perspective, I think one of hardest things about the role is figuring out, given your time, what 
are you getting done and why?
I¡¯ve heard from many of the other PM¡¯s that I¡¯ve spoken with as well that another 
important role of a PM is motivating team members. Is this something that strikes 
you as true for you?
You do have to motivate people in addition as well. In my opinion, the vehicle for motivation 
is the product vision that you¡¯re pitching. You know that quote about leading people to build 
a ship?
1
 I think that really applies here for Product Managers and pitching a product vision 
to the team.
In terms of most valuable skills, here¡¯s an ex-
ercise I would suggest doing: first, enumerate 
what skills you need (technical understanding, 
ability to evaluate tradeoffs, analytical skills, 
design, persuasion). Then, you should think 
about all of these and go over all what you feel 
like you lack and what you can learn in three months. I would say that the easiest skill to pick 
up would be the analytical bits. It¡¯s hard to become much more persuasive or a better designer 
in three months. It¡¯s also harder to become a way better engineer in three months.
So to recap: enumerate all of your skills and figure out what to double down on and what 
you¡¯re interested in improving.
In your opinion, what does it mean for a PM to be analytically skilled?
Given a problem, can they (a) understand the problem? Can they (b) ask questions that have 
simple data answers that lead you down the path of being able to solve that problem? (That 
includes asking for simple metrics, quick metrics.) And finally, can they (c) generate a clear 
hypothesis beforehand?
1  The quote Avichal is referencing here is by Antoine de Saint Exup¨¦ry ¡ª ¡°If you want to build a ship, don¡¯t drum up people to 
collect wood and don¡¯t assign them tasks and work, but rather teach them to long for the endless immensity of the sea.¡±
Enumerate all of your skills and 
figure out what to double down on.
54
I can program in Python and R, but don¡¯t have as concrete of development experi-
ence as I¡¯ve heard many PMs have. As someone who has somewhat of a technical 
background, what are some things I can do to compensate for this?
I think you should try to become more technical while you can in school. Generally, you be-
come less technical over time, so hedge against this. Being technical is not a hard prerequisite 
but it is incredibly valuable.
The other direction you could go is to become more design-oriented. If you¡¯re a great design-
er, you can also become a great PM. In general, you tend to see people who are successful in 
one of those two roles.
Something to keep in mind is that design doesn¡¯t 
have an end state. In other words, there is no point 
at which you just stop learning design. It¡¯s a con-
tinual iterative process that you have to go through 
to learn how to become a good designer ¡ª so start 
early! What you tend to see is that designers tend 
to get better as they get older. This is just as true for engineering.
A lot of people don¡¯t think of skills such as design or programming as lifelong skills; they 
think of things as thresholds. ¡°If I¡¯m ¡®good enough,¡¯ then I can stop¡± is the thought process. 
But really, you have to keep on getting better and better at all of these things.
Another thing to note is that design tends to be easier than engineering to do outside of school. 
So my advice would be to study engineering in school, and on the design end you can be 
self-driven to maintain.
What are some mental models or patterns that you¡¯ve seen that make a high-quality 
product?
If I had to mention one thing, it¡¯d be that I think that high-quality products don¡¯t try to do 
too much. They do one particular thing, and they do it exceptionally well. And that¡¯s the core 
of their value proposition. And I think a lot of times, if you¡¯re not absolutely amazing at one 
thing at a product, but instead spread across many different domains, then you tend to be 
replaceable and not have lasting value.
Look at Google, for example. Google at its core is still a search company. It took them many 
years to get other products out the door, and that¡¯s something to take note of.
What is the most unique skill you¡¯ve seen a PM have that made him or her excep-
tional?
I think if I had to try to pinpoint it, it would boil down to respect. When you¡¯re really good, 
it¡¯s really easy to develop a big ego. But the best PMs I¡¯ve worked with don¡¯t have big egos. 
They¡¯re not trying to be smarter than everyone in the room or put anyone down. For example, 
AVICHAL GARG
Neither design nor engineering 
has an end state.
55
it¡¯s easy to blow junior people off when you¡¯re an executive at a big company, but the best 
product leaders treat everyone with respect and humility. That¡¯s something that just reso-
nates with people and makes them want to work for you that much more.
One trait I¡¯ve heard mentioned before as being important to a Product Management 
position is having product sense. In your opinion, how does one develop great prod-
uct sense?
It¡¯s a very hard thing to learn. I¡¯m not even 
100% sure if you can effectively learn it. Ev-
eryone who has had this skill seems to have 
it innately. If you can synthesize human moti-
vation and human desire into a tangible thing 
(e.g., where the buttons go, what you name the 
product) then you¡¯re on the right track. Maybe you can develop this through an extreme at-
tention to detail. Dissect what makes something good and what makes something not good. 
You can learn from that process.
I guess as a whole, people who are good at noticing the little details tend to be able to pattern 
match (e.g., what makes many other products great will probably make this one great) and 
develop the product intuition necessary to be a great PM.
What are the metrics you use in measuring your own success? Which ones are the 
highest priority and why?
The most important metric for me is freedom: ¡°Where can I have the most  long-term freedom 
to learn, be happy, and have an impact?¡± For me, that¡¯s turned out to be having a couple of 
startups before my current role at Facebook. This path has given me both financial freedom 
and a skillset that gives me tremendous freedom inside a company that values innovative, 
creative problem solving (which Facebook values tremendously).
How much freedom do you feel you have in your Product Management role?
I think that the PM position is pretty high in terms of the amount of freedom you get.
Keep in mind that different companies also given you different flavors of PM.
Facebook has a bias towards PMs who are strong in design or analytics. If you look at the back-
grounds of people who work at FB, there are a lot of people who have diverse backgrounds, 
such as in design or data analysis. Facebook is extremely data-driven and as a result, even a 
design-driven PM here would probably need to have more of a background in analytics.
It¡¯s also important to note that in terms of the difference between the top 0.1% of PM¡¯s, you 
would find that the best of the best are highly skilled in both of these domains.
AVICHAL GARG
The best product leaders treat ev-
eryone with respect and humility.
56
I¡¯ve often heard the advice that I should do a ¡°technical¡± job first for a few years 
before jumping into PM, because it¡¯s hard to switch back to a ¡°technical¡± job (such 
as programming, designing) after doing a PM role. Do you think it¡¯s a better idea to 
jump right into the PM role after graduation, or should I do a regular role first and 
move in to the PM role?
I think it¡¯s fine either way. It¡¯s really a matter of 
whether you think you have the requisite back-
ground in technical abilities. It¡¯s okay to jump into 
PM directly if you feel comfortable with your back-
ground as either a technical individual or a design-
er. Honestly, a lot of times, people coming out of 
school tend not to have the requisite skillset yet. So if this is true for you, you should really go 
build some of that skillset and get good at those areas before going into a Product Manage-
ment role.
For students who are interested in Product Management, but who might also feel like they 
are lacking some important skills, here¡¯s what I would suggest: if you can get a PM job at a 
tier-one organization (e.g., IDEO, Apple, FB, Google) to synthesize product work: go do it.
If you can¡¯t, try to enumerate what gaps you have in your skills and fill those in. Maybe it¡¯s 
engineering, or design, or something else. Build these skills with some time, and then take 
another shot at it. That¡¯s not to say that being a PM at a tier-one large company is an end-state, 
but it¡¯s a way of benchmarking yourself. It¡¯s a litmus test of whether you have these skills.
It¡¯s probably the closest you can get to an SAT. So that might be a good proxy for whether you 
should go off to develop deeper skillsets or not.
AVICHAL GARG
The most important metric for 
me is freedom.
57
58
CARL has been fortunate to receive so much help from the numerous people who assisted 
in the creation of The Product Manager Handbook. The feedback many of his close friends gave 
ended up being invaluable in guiding the direction this handbook took. He would especially 
like to thank Chloe Lim for thoroughly editing the handbook and Gerson Abesamis for giving 
thoughtful feedback on initial designs. He would also like to thank Gayle Laakmann McDow-
ell and Jackie Bavaro for contributing their thoughtful advice and feedback.
He would like to thank Brittany Cheng for agreeing to help with his wacky idea of compiling 
a Product Manager Handbook. Without her sharp design skills and patient feedback, this 
handbook would never have seen the light of day.
Finally, this handbook would not at all have been possible if it wasn¡¯t for the generosity and 
thoughtfulness by each and every of the successful Product Managers he interviewed. So to 
them, Carl would like to express his sincere appreciation.
BRITTANY would like to thank the many individuals who took time out of their busy PM 
schedules to speak to her and Carl about the work of a PM. She would also like to thank Ed-
ward Cheng for his design feedback during the initial development of the handbook layout. 
Finally, she would like to thank Carl Shan for his initiative, organization, persistence, proac-
tiveness, and daily onslaught of emails.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
59
CARL SHAN is a lifelong student, mentor, teacher and aspiring Product Manager. With Brit-
tany¡¯s help, he compiled this handbook to share what he learned through his conversations 
about Product Management with as many people as possible. He is also the co-founder of 
CompassPoint Mentorship, a national not-for-profit educational venture that matches high-
school students up with college students for peer-to-peer mentoring.
This summer, Carl worked as a Mobile Product Manager at Pearson in New York City. His 
work led him to being nominated & selected by company executives as Pearson¡¯s ¡®Intern of 
the Year.¡¯
He currently studies Statistics at UC Berkeley.
You can get in touch with him at carl@carlshan.com
BRITTANY CHENG is passionate about technology, design, and education. Since taking her 
first graphic design class in high school, she has not stopped designing. The PM role excites 
her because it combines her love for design and her interest in technology. She is a co-director 
of Berkeley Innovation, a human-centered design student organization at UC Berkeley, and 
manages up to seven student design projects each semester.
This summer, Brittany was a Program Manager Intern at Microsoft. She worked with design-
ers and developers to design, spec, prototype, and implement new features and experiences 
for Movie Moments, a Windows 8.1 app.
She currently studies Electrical Engineering & Computer Science at UC Berkeley, with an em-
phasis in human-centered design.
You can get in touch with her at bcheng42@gmail.com
ABOUT CARL & BRITTANY
? 2013 Carl Shan and Brittany Cheng
